+++
title = "HGA Bylaws"
description = ""
date = 2013-01-24T13:18:33-05:00
draft = false
url = "about/bylaws"
layout = "about"
+++


**ADOPTED JULY 2001**

**AMENDED April 2003**

**AMENDED July 2007**

**AMENDED August 2009**

**AMENDED January 2013**

**BYLAWS OF**

**HEARTLAND GREYHOUND ADOPTION**

**ARTICLE I. OBJECTIVES and PURPOSE**
=====================================

**Section 1. Mission.** This organization shall be known as Heartland
Greyhound Adoption. The mission of Heartland Greyhound Adoption is to:
educate the public on greyhounds through outreach projects; continue the
education of greyhound owners within our membership encourage and
nurture the adoption of greyhounds; accept and screen applications for
greyhound adoptions; establish foster homes for adoptive greyhounds; aid
and support the efforts of other greyhound friends and adoption groups;
establish and promote cooperation and understanding with local humane
societies and other animal interest groups.

**Section 2. Nonprofit Characterization.** Heartland Greyhound Adoption
shall forever exist as a nonprofit organization. Heartland Greyhound
Adoption will conduct its activities to promote the purposes for which
it was organized as set forth in the Articles of Incorporation, which
may be included herewith. No part of its net earnings shall inure to the
benefit of or be distributable to its directors, officers, or other
private persons, except that it shall be authorized and empowered to pay
reasonable compensation for services rendered and to make payments and
distributions in furtherance of the purposes and objectives set forth
herein and in the Articles of Incorporation. No substantial part of the
activities of Heartland Greyhound Adoption shall be the carrying on of
propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and it
shall not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or
distribution of statements) any political campaign on behalf of any
candidate for public office. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
these Bylaws, it shall not carry on any activities not permitted to be
carried on by a corporation exempt from federal income tax under the
laws of the state of Iowa or the laws of the United States of America.

**ARTICLE II. OFFICES**
=======================

**Section 1. Principal Office.** The principal office of the corporation
in the State of Iowa shall be located at P.O. Box 342, Bondurant, county
of Polk. The corporation may have other offices, either within or
outside of the state of Iowa, as the Board of Directors may determine or
as the affairs of the corporation may require.

**Section 2. Registered Office.** The corporation shall maintain in the
State of Iowa a registered office, and a registered agent whose office
is identical with the registered office, as required by the Iowa
Nonprofit Corporation Act. The registered office may be, but need not
be, identical with the principal office in the State of Iowa, and the
address of the registered office may be changed from time to time by the
Board of Directors.

**ARTICLE III. MEMBERS**
========================

**Section 1. Classes of Members.** The corporation shall have one class
of members: Individual and Subscriber. Membership in the corporation is
open to any individual, at least 18 years old, who wishes to participate
in the organization or its functions. Members shall pay annual dues as
established by the Board of Directors.

**Section 2. Voting Rights.** Each member of the individual class shall
be entitled to one vote on each matter submitted to a vote of the
members. All other member voting rights are set forth in Article IV
below.

**Section 3. Termination of Membership.** The Board of Directors, by
affirmative vote of two-thirds of all of the members of the board, may
suspend or expel a member for cause after an appropriate hearing, and
may, by a majority vote of those present at any regularly constituted
meeting, terminate the membership of any member who becomes ineligible
for membership, or suspend or expel any member who shall be in default
in the payment of dues for the period fixed in Article XIII of these
bylaws.

**Amendment 1 (2007)** In the event that an adoption has been voided due
to unacceptable actions, living conditions, or the surrender of an
animal, membership is terminated immediately upon return of the
greyhound to the care of Heartland Greyhound Adoption.

**Section 4. Resignation.** Any member may resign by filing a written
resignation with the Secretary, but resignation shall not relieve the
member of the obligation to pay any dues, assessments or other charges
previously accrued and unpaid.

**Section 5. Reinstatement.** Upon written request signed by a former
member and filed with the Secretary, the Board of Directors may, by the
affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the board, reinstate
the former member to membership upon such terms as the Board of
Directors may deem appropriate.

**Section 6. Transfer of Membership.** Membership in this corporation is
not transferable or assignable.

**ARTICLE IV. MEETINGS OF MEMBERS**
===================================

**Section 1. Annual Meeting.** The annual meeting of members shall be
held between July 1^st^ and August 31^st^ on such a date as the Board of
Directors shall by resolution specify. At each annual meeting the
election of the directors shall take place and such other business shall
be transacted as may be properly presented to such meeting. If the day
fixed for the annual meeting shall be a legal holiday, such meeting
shall be held on the next succeeding business day. If the election of
directors shall not be held on the day designated herein for any annual
meeting, or at any adjournment thereof, the board of directors shall
cause the election to be held at a meeting of the members as soon
thereafter as conveniently may be.

**Section 2. Special Meetings.** The President, the Board of Directors,
or not les than one-tenth of the members having voting rights may call
special meetings of the members.

**Section 3. Place of Meeting.** The Board of Directors may designate
any place, either within or outside of the state of Iowa, as the place
of meeting for any annual meeting or for any special meeting called by
the Board of Directors. If no designation is made or if a special
meeting be otherwise called, the place of meeting shall be the
registered office of the corporation in the state of Iowa.

**Section 4. Notice of Meetings.** Written or printed notice stating the
place, day and hour of any business meeting of members shall be
delivered, either personally or by mail, to each member entitled to vote
at such meeting, not less than 10 nor more than 50 days before the date
of such meeting, by or at the direction of the President or the
Secretary, or the officers or persons calling the meeting. In case of a
special meeting or when required by statute or by these bylaws, the
purposes for which the meeting is called shall be stated in the notice.
If mailed, the notice of a meeting shall be deemed to be delivered when
deposited in the United States mail addressed to the member at his
address as it appears on the records of the corporation, with postage
thereon prepaid.

**Section 5. Informal Action by Members.** Any action required by law to
be taken at a meeting of the members, or any action which may be taken
at a meeting of members, may be taken without a meeting if a consent in
writing, setting out the action so taken, shall be signed by all of the
members entitled to vote with respect to the subject matter of the
action.

**Section 6. Quorum.** A quorum shall consist of the majority of the
board and one of the following:

a.  If non-board voting membership is greater than 50 members – 10% of
    > such members

b.  If non-board voting membership is between 5 and 49 – a minimum of 5
    > such members

c.  If non-board voting membership is less than 5 – 100% of such members

If a quorum is not present at any meeting of members, a majority of the
members present may adjourn the meeting without further notice.

**Section 7. Proxies.** At any business meeting of members, a member
entitled to vote may vote by proxy executed in writing by the member or
by his authorized attorney in fact. No proxy shall be valid after 11
months from the date of its execution, unless otherwise provided in the
proxy.

**Section 8. Voting by Mail.** Where directors or officers are to be
elected by members in the individual class, the election may be
conducted by mail in the manner that the Board of Directors shall
determine.

**ARTICLE V. BOARD OF DIRECTORS**
=================================

**Section 1. General Powers.** The affairs of the corporation shall be
managed by its Board of Directors. Directors need not be residents of
the state of Iowa, but do need to be members in the individual class of
the corporation.

**Section 2. Number and Tenure.** The number of directors shall be
seven. Each director shall hold office until the next annual meeting of
members during which his or her successor shall have been elected and
qualified. The election of a director shall be by the affirmative vote
of a simple majority of members qualified to vote. For the purpose of
establishing staggered terms of office, the Board of Directors shall be
divided into six classes as follows:

Class I shall consist of one director identified as the President, who
shall serve a term of

office, which shall expire at the annual meeting held in the year 2004
and at the annual

> meeting held every third year thereafter.

Class II shall consist of one director identified as the Treasurer and
who shall serve a

term of office which shall expire at the annual meeting held in the year
2003 and at the

annual meeting held every third year thereafter.

Class III shall consist of one director identified as the Secretary and
who shall serve a

term of office which shall expire at the annual meeting held in 2002 and
at the annual

meeting held every third year thereafter.

Class IV shall consist of one director identified as the Vice President
and who shall serve

> a term of office which shall expire at the annual meeting held in 2003
> and at the annual meeting held every second year thereafter.

Class V shall consist of two directors identified as At Large Directors,
who shall serve

terms of office which shall expire at the annual meeting held in 2003
and at the annual

> meeting held every second year thereafter. This class will now expire
> at the annual meeting held in 2004 and at the annual meeting held
> every second year thereafter.

Class VI shall consist of one director identified as an At Large
Director, who shall serve a

term of office which shall expire at the annual meeting held in 2002 and
at the annual

> meeting held every year thereafter. This class will now expire at the
> annual meeting held in 2003 and at the annual meeting held every
> second year thereafter.

Jorene King shall be the initial director for Class I; Aaron Siebrecht
shall be the initial director for Class II; Carol Zingg shall be the
initial director for Class III; Barbara Gilbert shall be the initial
director for Class IV; Kate Swensen and Jody Evans shall be the initial
directors for class V; and Vicki Williams shall be the initial director
for Class VI.

**Section 3. Regular Meetings.** The regular meetings of the Board of
Directors shall be held on such date as the Board of Directors shall by
resolution specify. A regular annual meeting of the Board of Directors
shall be held without other notice than this bylaw, immediately after,
and at the same place as, the annual meeting of members.

**Section 4. Special Meetings.** Special meetings of the Board of
Directors may be called by or at the request of the President or any two
directors. The persons authorized to call special meetings of the board
may fix any place, either within or outside of the state of Iowa, as the
place for holding any special meeting of the board called by them

**Section 5. Notice.** Notice of any special meeting of the Board of
Directors shall be given at least two days previously by written notice
delivered personally or by telephone or fax to each director at the
director’s address as shown by the records of the corporation. If notice
is given by telephone, such notice will be deemed to be delivered when a
verbal message is given to the director or by message left on a machine
or with an individual at the phone number registered with the
corporation. If notice is given by fax, it shall be deemed to be
delivered when successfully transmitted to the recipient’s facsimile
machine at the recipient’s last fax number registered with the
corporation. Notice will be given at least two days previous to any
special meeting and at least ten days previous to any regular meeting.
Any director may waive notice of any meeting. The attendance of a
director at any meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice of such
meeting, except where a director attends a meeting for the express
purpose of objecting to the transaction of any business because the
meeting is not lawfully called or convened. Neither the business to be
transacted at, nor the purpose of, any regular or special meeting of the
board need be specified in the notice or waiver of notice of such
meeting, unless specifically required by law or by these bylaws.

**Section 6. Quorum.** A majority of the Board of Directors shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of
the board; but if less than a majority of the directors are present at
the meeting, a majority of the directors present may adjourn the meeting
from time to time without further notice.

**Section 7. Manner of Acting.** The act of a majority of the directors
present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of
the Board of Directors, unless the act of a greater number is required
by law or by these bylaws.

**Section 8. Removal.** Any Director elected by the members may be
removed by a simple majority vote of the members of the individual class
present at the business or special meeting.

**Section 9. Vacancies.** The Board of Directors shall fill any vacancy
occurring in the Board of Directors and any directorship to be filled by
reason of an increase in the number of directors. A director elected to
fill a vacancy shall be elected for the unexpired term of the director’s
predecessor in office. Any Director appointed by the Board of Directors
may be removed by the Board of Directors by a majority vote. Such
removal shall be with out prejudice to the contract rights, if any, of
the person so removed whenever in its best judgment the best interest of
the corporation would be served by such removal.

**Section 10. Compensation.** Directors shall not receive any stated
salaries for their services, but by resolution of the Board of Directors
a fixed sum and expenses of attendance, if any, may be allowed for
attendance at each regular or special meeting of the board; but nothing
contained here shall be construed to preclude any director from serving
the corporation in any other capacity and receiving compensation for
such services.

**Section 11. Informal Action by Directors.** Any action required by law
to be taken at a meeting of directors, or any action which may be taken
at a meeting of directors, may be taken without a meeting if a consent
in writing, setting out the action so taken, shall be signed by all of
the directors.

**ARTICLE VI. OFFICERS**
------------------------

**Section 1. Officers.** The officers of the corporation shall be a
President, a Vice-President, a Secretary, a Treasurer and such other
officers as may be elected in accordance with the provisions of this
article. The Board of Directors may elect or appoint by majority vote
other officers, including, but not limited to, one or more assistant
Secretaries and one or more assistant Treasurers, as it shall deem
desirable, to have the authority and perform the duties prescribed by
the Board of Directors.

**Section 2. Election and Term of Office.** The officers of the
corporation shall be elected annually as set forth in Article V, Section
2, by the members at their regular annual meeting. If the election of
officers shall not be held at such meeting, it shall be held as soon
thereafter as is convenient. New offices may be created and filled at
any meeting of the Board of Directors. Each officer shall hold office
until their successor shall have been elected and shall have qualified.

**Section 3. Removal.** Any officer elected by the members or appointed
by the Board of Directors may be removed by a simple majority vote
before the full Board of Directors whenever in its judgment the best
interests of the corporation would be served by such director’s removal,
but such removal shall be without prejudice to the contract rights, if
any, of the officer so removed.

**Section 4. Vacancies.** A vacancy in any office because of death,
resignation, removal, disqualification or otherwise, may be filled by
the Board of Directors for the unexpired portion of the term.

**Section 5. President.** The President shall be the principal executive
officer of the corporation and shall in general supervise and control
all of the business and affairs of the corporation. The President shall
preside at all meetings of the members and of the Board of Directors. He
or she may sign, with the Secretary or any other proper officer of the
corporation authorized by the Board of Directors, any deeds, mortgages,
bonds, contracts, or other instruments which the Board of Directors has
authorized to be executed, except in cases where the signing and
execution shall be expressly delegated by the Board of Directors or by
these bylaws or by statute to some other officer or agent of the
corporation; and in general he or she shall perform all duties incident
to the office of President and such other duties as may be prescribed by
the board of Directors.

**Section 6. Vice-President.** In the absence of the President or in the
event of the President’s inability or refusal to act, the Vice-President
(or in the event there be more than one Vice-President, the
Vice-Presidents in the order of their election) shall perform the duties
of the President, and when so acting, shall have all the powers of and
be subject to all the restrictions upon the President. Any
Vice-President shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the
President or by the Board of Directors.

**Section 7. Treasurer.** If required by the Board of Directors, the
Treasurer shall give a bond for the faithful discharge of the
Treasurer’s duties in such sum and with such surety as the Board of
Directors shall determine. He or she shall have charge and custody of
and be responsible for all funds and securities of the corporation;
receive and give receipts for moneys due and payable to the corporation
from any source, and deposit all such moneys in the name of the
corporation in such banks, trust companies or other depositories as
shall be selected in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII
(Contracts, Checks, Deposits and Funds) of these bylaws; and in general
perform all the duties incident to the office of Treasurer and such
other duties as may be assigned to the Treasurer by the President or by
the Board of Directors.

**Section 8. Secretary.** The Secretary shall keep the minutes of the
meetings of the members and of the Board of Directors in books provided
for that purpose; see that all notices are given in accordance with the
provisions of these bylaw or as required by law; be custodian of the
corporate records; keep a register of the post office address of each
member which shall be furnished to the Secretary by that member; and in
general perform all duties incident to the office of Secretary and such
other duties as may be assigned by the President or by the Board of
Directors.

**Section 9. Assistant Treasurers and Assistant Secretaries.** If
appointed and required by the Board of Directors, the assistant
Treasurers shall give bonds for the faithful discharge of their duties
in such sums and with such sureties as the Board of Directors shall
determine. The assistant Treasurers and assistant Secretaries, in
general, shall perform the duties assigned to them by the Treasurer or
the Secretary or by the President or the Board of Directors.

**ARTICLE VII. COMMITTEES**
---------------------------

**Section 1. Committees of Directors.** The Board of Directors, by
resolution adopted by a majority of the directors in office, may
designate and appoint one or more committees, each of which shall
consist of two or more directors, which committees, to the extent
provided in the resolution, shall have and exercise the authority of the
Board of Directors in the management of the corporation; provided,
however, that no such committee shall have the authority of the Board of
Directors in reference to amending, altering or repealing the bylaws;
electing, appointing or removing any member of any such committee or any
director or officer of the corporation;

**Section 2. Other Committees.** Other committees not having and
exercising the authority of the Board of Directors in the management of
the corporation may be designated by a resolution adopted by a majority
of the directors present at a meeting at which a quorum is present.
Except as otherwise provided in the resolution, members of each such
committee shall consist of members of the corporation; and the Board of
Directors or a designee of the corporation shall appoint the members of
the committees. The persons authorized to appoint such member whenever
in their judgment the best interests of the corporation shall be served
by such removal may remove any member. Each committee shall report to
the Board of Directors at the designated Board meetings.

**Section 3. Term of Office.** Each member of a committee shall continue
as a member until the next annual meeting of the members of the
corporation and until the member’s successor is appointed, unless the
committee shall be terminated sooner, or unless the member be removed
from the committee, or unless the member shall cease to qualify as a
member of the committee.

**Section 4. Chair.** One member of each committee shall be appointed
chair by the person or persons authorized to appoint the members of the
committee.

**Section 5. Vacancies.** Vacancies in the membership of any committee
may be filled by appointments made in the same manner as provided in the
case of the original appointments.

**Section 6. Quorum.** Unless otherwise provided in the resolution of
the Board of Directors designating a committee, a majority of the whole
committee shall constitute a quorum and the act of a majority of the
members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the
act of the committee.

**Section 7. Rules.** Each committee may adopt rules for its own
government not inconsistent with these bylaws or with rules adopted by
the Board of Directors.

**ARTICLE VIII. CONTRACTS, CHECKS, DEPOSITS AND FUNDS**
-------------------------------------------------------

**Section 1. Contracts.** The Board of Directors may authorize by
majority vote any officer or officers, agent or agents of the
corporation, in addition to the officers so authorized by these bylaws,
to enter into any contract or execute and deliver any instrument in the
name of and on behalf of the corporation, and such authority may be
general or confined to specific instances. In the absence of this
determination by the Board of Directors, the instruments shall be signed
by the Treasurer or an assistant Treasurer and countersigned by the
President or a Vice-President of the corporation.

**Section 2. Checks, Drafts, etc.** All checks, drafts or orders for the
payment of money, or other evidences of indebtedness issued in the name
of the corporation, shall be signed by those officers or agents of the
corporation and in a manner as shall be determined by resolution of the
Board of Directors. In the absence of this determination by the Board of
Directors, the instruments shall be signed by the Treasurer or an
assistant Treasurer and countersigned by the President or a
Vice-President of the corporation.

**Section 3. Deposits.** All funds of the corporation shall be deposited
to the credit of the corporation in the banks, trust companies or other
depositories as the Board of Directors may select.

**Section 4. Gifts.** The Board of Directors may accept on behalf of the
corporation any contribution, gift, bequest or devised for the general
purposes or for any special purpose of the corporation.

**ARTICLE IX. CERTIFICATES OF MEMBERSHIP**
------------------------------------------

**Section 1. Certificates of Membership.** The Board of Directors may
provide for the issuance of certificates evidencing membership with
voting rights in the corporation, which shall be in such form as may be
determined by the board. The certificates shall be signed by the
President or a Vice-President and by the Secretary or an assistant
Secretary. All certificates evidencing membership of any class shall be
consecutively numbered. The name and address of each member and the date
of issuance of the certificate shall be entered on the records of the
corporation. If any certificate shall become lost, mutilated or
destroyed, a new certificate may be issued upon the terms and conditions
as the Board of Directors may determine.

**Section 2. Issuance of Certificates.** When a member has paid any
initiation fee and dues that may then be required, a certificate of
membership shall be issued in such member’s name and delivered by the
Secretary or Assistant Secretary, if the Board of Directors shall have
provided for the issuance of certificates of membership under the
provisions of Section 1 of this Article.

**ARTICLE X. INDEMNIFICATION**
------------------------------

The Corporation shall indemnify any present or former director, officer,
employee, member, or volunteer in the manner and in the instances
authorized in Iowa Code Sections 490.850 through 490.858 (2001). The
rights to indemnification conferred in this Article shall not be
exclusive of any other right which any person may have or hereafter
acquire under any statute, the Articles of Incorporation or any
agreement, vote of the disinterested members or disinterested Directors
or otherwise.

**ARTICLE XI. BOOKS AND RECORDS**
---------------------------------

The corporation shall keep correct and complete books and records of
account and shall also keep minutes of the proceedings of its business,
Board of Directors and committee meetings having any of the authority of
the Board of Directors, and shall keep at the registered or principal
office a record giving the names and addresses of the members entitled
to vote. All books and records of the corporation may be inspected by
any member, or his agent or attorney for any proper purpose at any
reasonable time.

***ARTICLE XII. FISCAL YEAR***

The fiscal year of the corporation shall begin on the first day of
January and end on the last day of December in each year.

***ARTICLE XIII. DUES***

**Section 1. Annual Dues.** The Board of Directors may determine the
amount of initiation fee, if any, and annual dues payable to the
corporation by members of each class.

**Section 2. Payment of Dues.** The Board of Directors shall determine
the place and time of payment of dues.

**Section 3. Default and Termination of Membership.** When any member of
any class shall be in default in the payment of dues upon expiration,
such member’s membership may be terminated by the Board of Directors in
the manner provided in Article III (Members) of these bylaws.

***ARTICLE XIV. WAIVER OF NOTICE***

Whenever any notice is required to be given under the provisions of the
Iowa Nonprofit Corporation Act or under the provisions of the articles
of incorporation or the bylaws of the corporation, a waiver in writing
signed by the persons entitled to the notice, whether before or after
the time stated there, shall be deemed equivalent to the giving of
notice.

***ARTICLE XV. AMENDMENTS TO BYLAWS***

These bylaws may be altered, amended or repealed and new bylaws may be
adopted by a majority of the directors and majority of members present
at the annual meeting or at any special meeting, if at least two days’
written notice is given of intention to alter, amend or repeal or to
adopt new bylaws at the meeting. Pursuant to Iowa Code section 504a.12
(2001), the Board of Directors may adopt emergency bylaws, subject to
repeal or change by action of the members, which shall, notwithstanding
any different provision elsewhere in the Articles of Incorporation or
the bylaws or the Iowa Code, be operative during any emergency, in the
conduct of the affairs of the corporation resulting from an attack on
the United States or any nuclear or atomic disaster.

***ARTICLE XVI. DISOLUTION AND DISPOSITION***

Upon dissolution of the organization, its assets remaining after
payment, or provision for payment, of all debts and liabilities of this
organization shall be distributed for one or more exempt purposes within
the meaning of Section 501 (c )3 of the Internal Revenue Code. Such
distribution shall be made in accordance with all applicable provision
of the laws of this state. All dogs in the organizations care will be
placed in adoptive homes.

***ARTICLE XVII CONFLICT OF INTEREST***

At the time of tax filing or newly elected to the board of directors,
all board of directors will file a conflict of interest statement.

When board of directors of their family members have a material conflict
of interest in the matter, being considered by the board of directors,
they should refrain from attempting to influence other decision makers
regarding the matter. Board of directors members with a material
conflict of interest are required to recues themselves from board
discussions and votes regarding those matters other than to respond to
informational requests.